Bootstrap strategy for RandomForest (#3829)
mlpack/mlpack: doc/user/methods/random_forest.md

---

 * `rf = RandomForest(data, labels, numClasses,          numTrees=20, minLeafSize=1, minGainSplit=1e-7, maxDepth=0, dimSelector={}, bootstrap={})`

>  * `rf = RandomForest(data, labels, numClasses, weights, numTrees=20, minLeafSize=1, minGainSplit=1e-7, maxDepth=0, dimSelector={}, bootstrap={})`

Reviewer: So, when I originally wrote the documentation here, I chose to omit `dimSelector` because I thought it was confusing; for default template parameters, a user would never need to specify it.  Only if the user explicitly specified a custom `DimensionSelectionType` (and one that explicitly held some kind of state!) would they need to specify the parameter.

Therefore, I chose to document it in the `DimensionSelectionType` section, noting that if a custom `DimensionSelectionType` is used, an instantiated one can be passed as the last parameter to the constructor.

I'd like to do the same strategy here since the same situation applies: a user will never need to specify the `bootstrap` parameter unless they are using a custom bootstrap strategy that actually takes state.

What do you think?  I'm open to different strategies of encoding the information, but I definitely want to make sure that the "basic" documentation where users don't think about template parameters (so, this section) doesn't get over-complicated.

| `minLeafSize` | `size_t` | Minimum number of points in each leaf node of each decision tree. | `1` |
| `minGainSplit` | `double` | Minimum gain for a node to split in each decision tree. | `1e-7` |
| `maxDepth` | `size_t` | Maximum depth for each decision tree. (0 means no limit.) | `0` |
| `dimSelector` | `DimensionSelectionType` | | `DimensionSelectionType()` |

> | `bootstrap` | `BootstrapType` | Bootstrap strategy. | `BootstrapType()` |    

Reviewer: Let's not put this documentation here, where it might be confusing.  Instead let's add it as a bullet point introducing the constructor with all options at the beginning of the `Fully custom behavior` section, after we introduce all of the template parameters.

Reviewer: This comment is still relevant---we can remove these two parameters from here.

---

> Train a `RandomForest` with the `SequentialBootstrap` strategy.

Reviewer: Either we should locate this after the section of documentation that introduces the `SequentialBootstrap`, or we should link ahead to the documentation.

Reviewer: This comment is still relevant---we shouldn't add this example until after we have introduced the `SequentialBootstrap` class.

```c++
// 1000 random points in 10 dimensions.
arma::mat dataset(10 /* rows */, 1000 /* cols */, arma::fill::randu);
// Random labels for each point, totaling 5 classes.
arma::Row<size_t> labels =
arma::randi<arma::Row<size_t>>(1000, arma::distr_param(0, 4));

> arma::umat intervals(labels.n_cols, 2);

Reviewer: Shouldn't this be `intervals(2, labels.n_cols)`?

Reviewer: This comment is still relevant.

for (arma::uword i(0); i < labels.n_cols; ++i) {
  // Create intervals of random length.
  intervals(i, 0) = i;
  intervals(i, 1) = i + std::rand();
  if (intervals(i, 1) > 1000) {
    intervals(i, 1) = 1000;
  }

> }

Reviewer: Can you make this (and other code) match the mlpack style guide?

Also I know it maybe makes the example a little less boring, but I think it would be clearer if you just hardcoded two or three intervals and then made the `SequentialBootstrap` object.  For the setup, too, maybe it makes sense to add a line or two in the comments like "this is random data, but in a real-world scenario this might be financial time series data that consists of a number of events...", this type of thing to give a bit of extra clarity on the context in which this might be used.

Reviewer: This comment is still relevant too.

 * `CategoricalSplitType`: the strategy used for finding splits on categorical
   data dimensions
 * `UseBootstrap`: a boolean indicating whether or not to use a bootstrap sample
   when training each tree in the forest. This argument will be removed in future

>    versions as it is superseded by the BootstrapType strategy.

Reviewer: We can be explicit: `future version` -> `mlpack 5.0.0`.

   dataset will be used to train each decision tree.

#### `BootstrapType`

 * Specifies the strategy used for bootstrapping data for each tree in the random forest.
 * Three implementations for `BootstrapType` are available for drop-in usage:
   - `DefaultBootstrap` *(default)*: bootstrap via random sampling with replacement.
   - `IdentityBootstrap`: no bootstrapping.  Simply copies the input `dataset`, `labels`, and `weights` for each tree's data.
   - `SequentialBootstrap`: bootstrapping from overlapping sequences such that samples with informational overlap behave more I.I.D.
     * Useful when data consists of multiple overlapping events (or individual sequences).
     * `b = SequentialBootstrap(intervals)` will create a `SequentialBootstrap` object, where:
       - `intervals` is of type `arma::umat`, with 2 rows and `n` columns, where `n` is the number of events to be sampled from.
       - Each column in `intervals` represents the start and end columns (inclusive) of each event.
       - So, e.g., if the 10th event is 5 points long, starting at index 6, then column `9` of `intervals` should be `[6, 10]`.

>      * A `SequentialBootstrap` must be passed as the `bootstrap` option to the [advanced constructor](#fully-custom-behavior).

Reviewer: ```suggestion
     * A `SequentialBootstrap` must be passed as the `bootstrap` option to the advanced constructor (below).
```
That href doesn't actually point anywhere useful---since we introduce the constructor below, better to just say "below".  Sorry if that was originally a suggestion of mine that wasn't good.

```c++
class CustomBootstrapType
{
 public:
  /**
   * Compute a bootstrap dataset based on the original dataset.
   * If `UseWeights` is `false`, then `weights` and `bootstrapWeights` can be
   * ignored.
   *
   * When the function is complete, `bootstrapDataset` and `bootstrapLabels`
   * should contain a bootstrapped dataset.  If `UseWeights` is `true`, then
   * `bootstrapWeights` should contain the corresponding instance weights for
   * the bootstrapped dataset.
   */
  template<
      bool UseWeights,
      typename MatType,
      typename LabelsType,
      typename WeightsType>
  void Bootstrap(
      const MatType& dataset,
      const LabelsType& labels,
      const WeightsType& weights,
      MatType& bootstrapDataset,
      LabelsType& bootstrapLabels,
      WeightsType& bootstrapWeights);
};
```

---

Train a `RandomForest` with the `SequentialBootstrap` strategy.

```c++
// 1000 random points in 10 dimensions. In reality this might be
// financial time-series data.
arma::mat dataset(10 /* rows */, 1000 /* cols */, arma::fill::randu);

// Random labels for each point, totaling 5 classes.
arma::Row<size_t> labels =

>     arma::randi<arma::Row<size_t>>(1000, arma::fill::zeros);

Reviewer: This example fails to compile because this line is not valid.  Can you fix this?  Like I mentioned in another comment, you can test this manually in your repository by running `CXX=g++ ./scripts/test-docs.sh doc/user/methods/random_forest.md`.  This will also fail for reasons unrelated to your code, so I added some suggestions above to fix those.

arma::umat intervals(2, labels.n_cols);

// This example only has 2 active events
intervals(0, 0) = 0; // start of first event
intervals(1, 0) = 200; // end of first event
intervals(0, 200) = 200; // start of second event

> intervals(1, 200) = 500; // end of second event

Reviewer: It feels like this is a confusing example: why have 1000 data points if only 2 of them are active events?  I think it might be more effective to just have a dataset with 3 points or something, and where all of the events are active.  Did I overlook something?  It's important to get this example right because this is what a user will most likely look at when trying to implement their own code, so we probably should also make sure this handles the intended use case, where events are overlapping (they aren't in the example here).

Author: only having 3 points and then using a RF with 20 trees also sounds strange. I just added a third point and explained in the comment how they overlap / not overlap

   */
  template<
      bool UseWeights,
      typename MatType,
      typename LabelsType,
      typename WeightsType>
  void Bootstrap(
      const MatType& dataset,
      const LabelsType& labels,
      const WeightsType& weights,
      MatType& bootstrapDataset,
      LabelsType& bootstrapLabels,
      WeightsType& bootstrapWeights);
};
```

---

Train a `RandomForest` with the `SequentialBootstrap` strategy.

```c++
// 1000 random points in 10 dimensions. In reality this might be
// financial time-series data.
arma::mat dataset(10 /* rows */, 1000 /* cols */, arma::fill::randu);

// Random labels for each point, totaling 5 classes.
arma::Row<size_t> labels =
    arma::randi<arma::Row<size_t>>(1000, arma::distr_param(0, 4));

arma::umat intervals(2, labels.n_cols);

// This example only has 3 active events
// The first two events overlap in [100,200].
// The third event is fully isolated (no
// informational overlap)
intervals(0, 0) = 0; // start of first event
intervals(1, 0) = 200; // end of first event
intervals(0, 100) = 100; // start of second event
intervals(1, 100) = 500; // end of second event
intervals(0, 600) = 600; // start of third event

> intervals(1, 600) = 1000; // end of third event

Reviewer: I still have a little confusion over this setup though: we do have three events, and they overlap, but there are 1000 columns in the original dataset.  Why have the 1000 columns, then?  My input would be:

 * either we should set a default time range for each sample, like
 
 ```c++
 for (size_t c = 0; c < 1000; ++c)
 {
   // Every "normal" event has length 1 and happens at the time step equivalent to its column.
   intervals(0, c) = c;
   intervals(1, c) = c;
 }
 
 // Now set the three "overlapping" events to have longer ranges.
 ```
 
  * Or, reduce the size of the dataset to only 3 points.  (But that seems a little artificial---why would you use a random forest then?)

(Also, do you think you can work in the changes to fix the documentation snippet build? https://gist.github.com/rcurtin/92bb8bf09b301da3975002fdd0dfcdb7 -- I don't see those in the diff here.)

   dataset will be used to train each decision tree.
 * If `false` _(default for the `ExtraTrees` [variant](#fully-custom-behavior))_, the full
   dataset will be used to train each decision tree.
 * This parameter will be removed in future versions. A value of `false` will then be
   equivalent to `BootstrapType` `IdentityBootstrap` and a value of `true` will be
   equivalent to `DefaultBootstrap`.

#### `BootstrapType`

> Classes compatible with the `BootstrapType` concept support a single bool class template argument `UseWeights` to specify
> whether classes `Bootstrap()` method should bootstrap the weights or not.
> 
> The concept requires a method with the following signature:
> 
> `void Bootstrap(dataset, labels, weights, bootstrapDataset, bootstrapLabels, bootstrapWeights);`
> 
> The library provides three implementations for the `BootstrapType` concept.
> 
> | **name** | **description** |
> |----------|-----------------|
> | `IdentityBootstrap` | This implementation is a no-op. It just copies the input `dataset`, `labels`, and `weights` to the output `bootstrapDataset`, `bootstrapLabels`, and `bootstrapWeihts` |
> | `DefaultBootstrap` | This implementation of a bootstrap is a random sampling with replacement. |
> | `SequentialBootstrap` | This implementation of a bootstrap is a random sampling with replacement as presented in: M. López de Prado (2018): "Advances in Financial Machine Learning", pp. 63-65 |

Reviewer: I know this is a little pedantic but I think it's really important that documentation styling is unified.  Primarily I just changed the formatting to match other template parameters, and added documentation for parameters to the `Bootstrap()` method.  I also made minor wording changes to try and make things a little shorter / more consistent with other sections.

Don't feel obligated to take the suggestion as-is, but I would like if we could make the way this subsection looks match the other subsections about the other template parameters.

```suggestion

 * Specifies the strategy used for bootstrapping data for each .
 * Three implementations for `BootstrapType` are available for drop-in usage:
   - `DefaultBootstrap` *(default)*: bootstrap via random sampling with replacement.
   - `IdentityBootstrap`: no bootstrapping.  Simply copies the input `dataset`, `labels`, and `weights` for each tree's data.
   - `SequentialBootstrap`: bootstrapping via random sampling with replacement as presented in: M. López de Prado (2018): "Advances in Financial Machine Learning", pp. 63-65.
 * A custom `BootstrapType` class must take a `bool` template parameter `UseWeights` and implement one function:

```c++
template<bool UseWeights>
class CustomBootstrapType
{
  /**
   * Compute a bootstrap dataset based on the original dataset.
   * If `UseWeights` is `false`, then `weights` and `bootstrapWeights` can be
   * ignored.
   *
   * When the function is complete, `bootstrapDataset` and `bootstrapLabels`
   * should contain a bootstrapped dataset.  If `UseWeights` is `true`, then
   * `bootstrapWeights` should contain the corresponding instance weights for
   * the bootstrapped dataset.
   */
  template<typename MatType,
           typename LabelsType,
           typename WeightsType>
  void Bootstrap(const MatType& dataset,
                 const LabelsType& labels,
                 const WeightsType& weights,
                 MatType& bootstrapDataset,
                 LabelsType& bootstrapLabels,
                 WeightsType& bootstrapWeights)
};
```

Also:

 * There's no easily available PDF of the `Advances in Financial Machine Learning` book, but we tend to try and link to papers wherever possible.  Do you think we could link to the other paper you recommended?  The PDF isn't directly and freely available, but [it's at least got its own page on Elsevier](https://www.sciencedirect.com/science/article/abs/pii/S0378375897000414) so people at institutions should be able to get a PDF.  Maybe we can reference both, I'm fine with that.
 
 * I'm not deeply familiar with the technique you linked to, but do you think that we could expand beyond describing `SequentialBootstrap` as `random sampling with replacement`?  That doesn't differentiate from `DefaultBootstrap`.  My understanding is that `SequentialBootstrap` is weighted random sampling with replacement such that the final bootstrap sample is equally informative (for some definition of 'informative'... but I can only see the abstract :)).

Author: I updated the documentation. I checked the author's webpage (https://quantresearch.org/Publications.htm), but there is no document available. I think referencing the other document is misleading.

   dataset will be used to train each decision tree.
 * If `false` _(default for the `ExtraTrees` [variant](#fully-custom-behavior))_, the full
   dataset will be used to train each decision tree.
 * This parameter will be removed in mlpack 5.0.0. A value of `false` will then be
   equivalent to `BootstrapType` `IdentityBootstrap` and a value of `true` will be
   equivalent to `DefaultBootstrap`.

#### `BootstrapType`

 * Specifies the strategy used for bootstrapping data for each .
 * Three implementations for `BootstrapType` are available for drop-in usage:
   - `DefaultBootstrap` *(default)*: bootstrap via random sampling with replacement.
   - `IdentityBootstrap`: no bootstrapping.  Simply copies the input `dataset`, `labels`, and `weights` for each tree's data.

>    - `SequentialBootstrap`: bootstrapping via random sampling with replacement such that samples with informational overlap 

Reviewer: Now that I understand `SequentialBootstrap` better, we actually have to make some changes here.  I know that they contradict some things I wrote previously; sorry about that.

For `DefaultBootstrap` and `IdentityBootstrap`, it is not necessary to pass an instantiated object to the `RandomForest` for training; they work statically.  So it suffices for a user to just specify `BootstrapType` as a template parameter.

But for `SequentialBootstrap`, the user may need to pass in an instantiated object that contains the data about how samples overlap.  So, we will need to document the constructor and `Train()` variants that allow specifying the instantiated bootstrap object.

Also, we will need to add documentation for the `SequentialBootstrap` itself.  I'm hoping it can be just a couple simple bullet points describing how the sample overlap information is passed.

For clarity it could also be useful to add a simple example usage of `SequentialBootstrap`, which will demonstrate the constructor with all of the arguments and also how to create a `SequentialBootstrap` object.  Even your simple example you used to explain to me could suffice.

Author: I updated the documentation to also include an example how to initialize the SequentialBootstrap and subsequently use it for initializing the random forest.

   - `SequentialBootstrap`: bootstrapping from overlapping sequences such that samples with informational overlap behave more I.I.D.
     * Useful when data consists of multiple overlapping events (or individual sequences).
     * `b = SequentialBootstrap(intervals)` will create a `SequentialBootstrap` object, where:
       - `intervals` is of type `arma::umat`, with 2 rows and `n` columns, where `n` is the number of events to be sampled from.
       - Each column in `intervals` represents the start and end columns (inclusive) of each event.
       - So, e.g., if the 10th event is 5 points long, starting at index 6, then column `9` of `intervals` should be `[6, 10]`.
     * A `SequentialBootstrap` must be passed as the `bootstrap` option to the [advanced constructor](#fully-custom-behavior).
     * For more information, see: M. López de Prado (2018): "Advances in Financial Machine Learning", pp. 63-65.

 * When using a `BootstrapType` that requires an instantiated object (such as `SequentialBootstrap`), the following advanced constructor forms can be used for `RandomForest`:
 
   - `RandomForest(... , bootstrap)`

>    - `RandomForest(..., bootstrap)`

Reviewer: Sorry, I had meant here that you would fill in the arguments.  This should fix it:

```
   - `rf = RandomForest(data, info, labels, numClasses,          numTrees, minLeafSize, minGainSplit, maxDepth, bootstrap)`
   - `rf = RandomForest(data, info, labels, numClasses, weights, numTrees, minLeafSize, minGainSplit, maxDepth, bootstrap)`
```

   dataset will be used to train each decision tree.
 * If `false` _(default for the `ExtraTrees` [variant](#fully-custom-behavior))_, the full
   dataset will be used to train each decision tree.
 * This parameter will be removed in mlpack 5.0.0. A value of `false` will then be
   equivalent to `BootstrapType` `IdentityBootstrap` and a value of `true` will be
   equivalent to `DefaultBootstrap`.

#### `BootstrapType`

 * Specifies the strategy used for bootstrapping data for each .
 * Three implementations for `BootstrapType` are available for drop-in usage:
   - `DefaultBootstrap` *(default)*: bootstrap via random sampling with replacement.
   - `IdentityBootstrap`: no bootstrapping.  Simply copies the input `dataset`, `labels`, and `weights` for each tree's data.

>    - `SequentialBootstrap`: bootstrapping via random sampling with replacement such that samples with informational overlap 
>      behave more IID as presented in: M. López de Prado (2018): "Advances in Financial Machine Learning", pp. 63-65.

Reviewer: Thanks for clarifying the documentation here.  I think that we should make it a little more explicit; what do you think?

```suggestion
   - `SequentialBootstrap`: bootstrapping from overlapping sequences such that samples with informational overlap behave more I.I.D.
     * Useful when data consists of multiple overlapping events (or individual sequences).
     * `b = SequentialBootstrap(intervals)` will create a `SequentialBootstrap` object, where:
       - `intervals` is of type `arma::umat`, with 2 rows and `m` columns, where `m` is the number of events.
       - Each column in `intervals` represents the start and end columns (inclusive) of each event.
       - So, e.g., if the 10th event is 5 points long, starting at index 6, then column `9` of `intervals` should be `6, 10`.
     * A `SequentialBootstrap` must be passed as the `bootstrap` option to the [advanced constructor](#fully-custom-behavior).
     * For more information, see: M. López de Prado (2018): "Advances in Financial Machine Learning", pp. 63-65.
```

 * A custom `BootstrapType` class must take a `bool` template parameter `UseWeights` and implement one function:

> ```c++

Reviewer: ```suggestion

```c++
```

Without the space, the Markdown may render incorrectly.
